Eulur's formula module (#6305)
cpinitiative/usaco-guide: content/6_Advanced/Eulers_Formula.mdx

<Resources>
	<Resource
		source="Open Math Books"
		title="Euler's Formula for Planar Graphs"
		url="https://discrete.openmathbooks.org/more/mdm/sec_planar.html"
	/>
	<Resource
		source="University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign"
		title="Planar Graphs"
		url="https://mfleck.cs.illinois.edu/building-blocks/version-1.0/planargraphs.pdf"
	/>

</Resources>

## Example 1

<Problems problems="e1" />

Firstly, notice that the fence will create a planar graph, where every closed-off region (including the region that consists of everything outside the fences) counts as a face. Every time we combine two faces by adding a gate, the number of faces will decrease by $1$. Thus, the answer will just be the number of faces in the graph minus one.

As a reminder, Euler's Formula states that $f=e−v+2$. To count the number of edges, we only need to count the number of unique unit-length segments Farmer John places. Likewise, to count the number of vertices, we just need to count the number of unique positions Farmer John visited. This can easily be achieved using sets.

Once we calculate these values, we can simply plug them back into the equation and get our answer.

<LanguageSection>

<CPPSection>

> ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```cpp
```

		title="Euler's Formula for Planar Graphs"
		url="https://discrete.openmathbooks.org/more/mdm/sec_planar.html"
	/>
	<Resource
		source="University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign"
		title="Planar Graphs"
		url="https://mfleck.cs.illinois.edu/building-blocks/version-1.0/planargraphs.pdf"
	/>

</Resources>

## Example 1

<Problems problems="e1" />

Firstly, notice that the fence will create a planar graph, where every closed-off region (including the region that consists of everything outside the fences) counts as a face. Every time we combine two faces by adding a gate, the number of faces will decrease by $1$. Thus, the answer will just be the number of faces in the graph minus one.

As a reminder, Euler's Formula states that $f=e−v+2$. To count the number of edges, we only need to count the number of unique unit-length segments Farmer John places. Likewise, to count the number of vertices, we just need to count the number of unique positions Farmer John visited. This can easily be achieved using sets.

Once we calculate these values, we can simply plug them back into the equation and get our answer.

<LanguageSection>

<CPPSection>

```
#include <bits/stdc++.h>
using namespace std;

> #define int long long

Reviewer: bad practice

Author: my bad forgot to remove, fixed

## Introduction

> Given a planar graph (a graph with no edges crossing), we can use Euler's formula $V - E + F = 2$ to relate the number of vertices ($V$), edges ($E$), and faces ($F$) of the graph.

Reviewer 2: i think you could expand a bit more on the definition of a planar graph? 

e.g. maybe specify that "no edges crossing" is in a more geometric sense

(also, i think a diagram would really help here)

The equation is related to the theorem that for any convex polyhedron, $V - E + F = 2$ will hold true, due to the fact that every convex polyhedron may be flattened into a planar graph.

> This can also be expanded to graphs that are not connected, to incorporate connected components, and the equation subsequently becomes $V - E + F = C + 1$, where $C$ is the number of connected components.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
This can be expanded to graphs that are not connected to incorporate connected components. To avoid overcounting the external face of the connected components, the equation subsequently becomes $V - E + F = C + 1$, where $C$ is the number of connected components.
```

<Resources>
	<Resource
		source="Open Math Books"
		title="Euler's Formula for Planar Graphs"
		url="https://discrete.openmathbooks.org/more/mdm/sec_planar.html"
	/>
	<Resource
		source="University of Illinois Urbana-Champaign"
		title="Planar Graphs"
		url="https://mfleck.cs.illinois.edu/building-blocks/version-1.0/planargraphs.pdf"
	/>

> </Resources>

Reviewer 2: u can maybe have a header for resources specifically

i believe https://usaco.guide/silver/prefix-sums is the closest to the module layout we wrote up / agreed on?

## Example 1

> <Problems problems="e1" />

Reviewer 2: should use a `<FocusProblem>` component?

> Firstly, notice that the fence will create a planar graph, where every closed-off region (including the region that consists of everything outside the fences) counts as a face. Every time we combine two faces by adding a gate, the number of faces will decrease by $1$. Thus, the answer will just be the number of faces in the graph minus one.

Reviewer 2: 1. "firstly" and "first" mean the same thing, but the latter is more common
2. maybe frame it with a bit more intuition (e.g. smth stating that it's just connected components on a geometric graph => oh hey it's planar)
3. maybe formally define what $V$, $E$, and $F$ are towards the start

As a reminder, Euler's Formula states that $f=e−v+2$. To count the number of edges, we only need to count the number of unique unit-length segments Farmer John places. Likewise, to count the number of vertices, we just need to count the number of unique positions Farmer John visited. This can easily be achieved using sets.

Once we calculate these values, we can simply plug them back into the equation and get our answer.

<LanguageSection>

<CPPSection>

```cpp
#include <bits/stdc++.h>
using namespace std;

> void solve() {

Reviewer 2: imo just put this all in main instead of a solve function

Author: Whoops 😭 that was not intentional

## Introduction

Given a planar graph (a graph with no edges crossing), we can use Euler's formula $V - E + F = 2$ to relate the number of vertices ($V$), edges ($E$), and faces ($F$) of the graph.

> The equation is related to the theorem that for any convex polyhedron, $V - E + F = 2$ will hold true, due to the fact that every convex polyhedron may be flattened into a planar graph.

Reviewer 3: Perhaps explain how the flattening works here?  That's what confused me on this topic (remove one face; the outer area outside the net corresponds to that face)

> This can also expanded to graphs that are not connected, to incorporate connected components, and the equation subsequently becomes $V - E + F = C + 1$, where $C$ is the number of connected components.

Reviewer 3: Incorporating connected components is implied by the last part.
```suggestion
This can also expanded to graphs that are not connected, and the equation subsequently becomes $V - E + F = C + 1$, where $C$ is the number of connected components.
```

<Resources>
	<Resource
		source="Open Math Books"
		title="Euler's Formula for Planar Graphs"
		url="https://discrete.openmathbooks.org/more/mdm/sec_planar.html"
	/>
	<Resource
		source="University of Illionois Urbana-Champaign"
		title="Planar Graphs"
		url="https://mfleck.cs.illinois.edu/building-blocks/version-1.0/planargraphs.pdf"
	/>

</Resources>

## Example 1

<Problems problems="e1" />

### Intuition

In this problem, we're asked to count the number of contiguous areas of cells on
several flat rectangles. Such areas are separated by river segments and
rectangle boundaries.

Where else do we count the number of areas on a flat surface?

That's right - we use Euler's formula to count the number of faces of a
[planar graph](http://discrete.openmathbooks.org/more/mdm/sec_planar.html). This

> suggests that we should turn our rectangles into planar graphs.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
suggests that we should turn our rectangles into a planar graph.
```

Each problem has 1 such planar graph?

> ### Making the Planar Graph

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
### Constructing the Planar Graph
```
Let's be a bit more professional... but if you're aiming for a casual feel go for it

\bullet & \text{—} & \bullet & \text{—} & \bullet & \text{—} & \bullet \\
| &A& &A& | &B& | &\\
\bullet & \text{—} & \bullet & \text{—} & \bullet & \text{—} & \bullet \\
| &B& &B& | &A& | &\\
\bullet & \text{ } & \bullet & \text{ } & \bullet & \text{—} & \bullet \\
| &B& &B&  &B& | &\\
\bullet & \text{—} & \bullet & \text{—} & \bullet & \text{—} & \bullet
\end{matrix}
$$

### Applying Euler's Formula

Again, Euler’s formula states that $V - E + F = C + 1$, where $V$ is the number of vertices, $E$ is the number of edges, $F$ is the number of faces, and $C$ is the number of connected components.

However, for the sake of this question, we are interested in the number of faces $(F = E - V + C + 1)$ the graph has, which is the number of regions adjacent cells with the same colors. Thus, by calculating $V, E,$ and $C$ and using these values to substitute into the formula, we obtain the answer.

Obtaining $V$ and $E$ is the most straightforward. For $V$, simply count the total number of corners, which corresponds to the dimensions of the subrectangle. For $E$, we can maintain a 2D prefix sums array representing the number of edges, calculating both $E$ and $V$ in $O(1)$.

> Calculating $C$

Reviewer 3: Make this a heading.

## Introduction

> Given a planar graph (a graph with no edges crossing), we can use Eulur's formula $V - E + F = 2$ to relate the number of vertices ($V$), edges ($E$), and faces ($F$) of the graph.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Given a planar graph (a graph with no edges crossing), we can use Euler's formula $V - E + F = 2$ to relate the number of vertices ($V$), edges ($E$), and faces ($F$) of the graph.
```

> The equation is similair in theorey to the theorem that for any convex polyhedron, $V - E + F = 2$ will hold true, due to the fact that every convex polyhedrons is able to be flattened into a planar graph.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The equation is related to the theorem that for any convex polyhedron, $V - E + F = 2$ will hold true, due to the fact that every convex polyhedron may be flattened into a planar graph.
```

This can also expanded to graphs that are not connected, to incorporate connected components, and the equation subsequently becomes $V - E + F = C + 1$, where $C$ is the number of connected components.

<Resources>
	<Resource
		source="Open Math Books"

> 		title="Eulur's Formula for Planar Graphs"

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
		title="Euler's Formula for Planar Graphs"
```

## Example 1

<Problems problems="e1" />

### Intuition

In this problem, we're asked to count the number of contiguous areas of cells on
several flat rectangles. Such areas are separated by river segments and
rectangle boundaries.

Where else do we count the number of areas on a flat surface?

That's right - we use Euler's formula to count the number of faces of a
[planar graph](http://discrete.openmathbooks.org/more/mdm/sec_planar.html). This
suggests that we should turn our rectangles into planar graphs.

### Making the Planar Graph

We can turn a rectangle into a planar graph as so:

- Put temporary river segments outside the border of the rectangle.
- For each river segment, we insert its 4 corners into a set of nodes and its 4
  sides into a set of edges.

Notice how the resulting graph is planar, so we can apply Euler's formula.

### Applying Euler's Formula

For a planar graph, Euler's formula is given as $F = E - V + 1 + C$, where $F$
is the number of faces (including the background face), $E$ is the number of
edges, $V$ is the number of vertices, and $C$ is the number of connected
components.

Notice how $F$ in our planar graph is equal to $1 + R + A$, where $R$ is the

> number of river segments and $A$ is the answer to the query. This means we must

Reviewer: What is a river segment?

		       query(a, b, right_c[node], mid + 1, r);
	}
} vertices, edges_horiz, edges_vert, rivers;

int mx_r, mn_r, mx_c, mn_c;

void add_river(int x, int y) {
	vertices.add(x, y);
	vertices.add(x + 1, y);
	vertices.add(x, y + 1);
	vertices.add(x + 1, y + 1);
	edges_horiz.add(x, y);
	edges_horiz.add(x + 1, y);
	edges_vert.add(x, y);
	edges_vert.add(x, y + 1);
	rivers.add(x, y);
}

void init(int R, int C, int sr, int sc, int M, char *S) {
	add_river(sr, sc);
	mx_r = mn_r = sr;
	mx_c = mn_c = sc;
	FOR(i, 0, M) {
		if (S[i] == 'N') sr--;
		if (S[i] == 'E') sc++;
		if (S[i] == 'S') sr++;
		if (S[i] == 'W') sc--;
		add_river(sr, sc);
		mx_r = max(mx_r, sr);
		mn_r = min(mn_r, sr);
		mx_c = max(mx_c, sc);
		mn_c = min(mn_c, sc);
	}
	vertices.build();
	edges_horiz.build();
	edges_vert.build();
	rivers.build();
}

int colour(int ar, int ac, int br, int bc) {
	int E =
	    edges_horiz.query(ar + 1, br, ac, bc) + edges_vert.query(ar, br, ac + 1, bc);
	int V = vertices.query(ar + 1, br, ac + 1, bc);
	int R = rivers.query(ar, br, ac, bc);
	int C = (ar >= mn_r || br <= mx_r || ac >= mn_c || bc <= mx_c ? 1 : 2);
	return E - V + C - R;
}
```

</CPPSection>
</LanguageSection>

## Example 2

> <Problems problems="e2" />

Reviewer: can you move this problem into the problems section rather than having it be a focus problem?

if we want two focus problems we probably want an easier one

Author: You mentioned that both of the problems are to hard as a focus, but all the problems already there in guide most of them are around the same difficulty level if not harder or not suitable for a focus question.

I couldn't find any like mid level question, which is why I was thinking abt like having a pretty easy focus question (maybe that silver one Build Gates) and then a hard one.

If you had any problem recs that u remember I can write an edi on it.

Reviewer: maybe just have build gates as the only focus problem for now?

> For a queried subrectangle, we can treat it as a planar graph where the vertices are the cell corners, and a edge exists between two vertices if the two corresponding cells the edge borders has different colors.

Reviewer: there seem like a lot of typos, can you use a spell checker or ask AI for review

For example, the subrectangle
$$
\begin{matrix}
\text{A} & \text{A} & \text{B} \\
\text{B} & \text{B} & \text{A} \\
\text{B} & \text{B} & \text{B}
\end{matrix}
$$

would subsequently be transformed into the planar graph:

$$
\begin{matrix}
\bullet & \text{—} & \bullet & \text{—} & \bullet & \text{—} & \bullet \\
| &A& &A& | &B& | &\\
\bullet & \text{—} & \bullet & \text{—} & \bullet & \text{—} & \bullet \\
| &B& &B& | &A& | &\\
\bullet & \text{ } & \bullet & \text{ } & \bullet & \text{—} & \bullet \\
| &B& &B&  &B& | &\\
\bullet & \text{—} & \bullet & \text{—} & \bullet & \text{—} & \bullet
\end{matrix}
$$

> ### Applying Eulur's Formula

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
### Applying Euler's Formula
```

> Again, Eulur's formula states that $V - E + F = C + 1$, where $V$ is the number of vertices, $E$ is the number of edges, $F$ is the number of faces, and $C$ is the number of connected components.

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
Again, Euler's formula states that $V - E + F = C + 1$, where $V$ is the number of vertices, $E$ is the number of edges, $F$ is the number of faces, and $C$ is the number of connected components.
```

This gives us a good estimate to the value of $C$, but we have to account for overcounting. Say some connected component's critical vertex exists in the current subrectangle, but the entire structure does not. This means that the component will have some vertex on the border of the subrectangle, implying it is not a unique connected component.

So, to filter out these such components, we can traverse through the border of the subrectangle and remove all connected components that share a vertex with the border. In the end, we must add $1$ back to $C$, to account for the component that contains the border.

### Calculating the Answer

In our example, $V = 16,\ E = 18,$ and $C = 2$. By plugging these values into our formula, we get $F = 18 - 16 + 2 + 1 = 5$.

But wait how did we get $5$, if it only takes $4$ brushstrokes to paint these region, and looking at the graph, there is only $4$ faces. This is because the formula also accounts for the face that consists of everything outside the subrectangle. So the final answer would be $E - V + C$, and for our sample that gives *$4$*, as expected.

<LanguageSection>
<CPPSection>

```cpp

> int N, h[750][750];

Reviewer: can you move the code for the previous focus problem into an internal sol instead of deleting it?

Author: Yes, although a while ago you had put the code for this as an internal sol with a different solution, do you want me to just put this code as solution 2 and a short tidbit about using Eulers?

Reviewer: oh I forgot about that. yes.

> #define int long long

Reviewer: ^ can you remove this?

	auto check_vertice = [&](int x, int y, int x1, int x2, int y1, int y2) -> bool {
		int crit_x = critical[x][y][0];
		int crit_y = critical[x][y][1];
		if (crit_x >= x1 and crit_x <= x2 and crit_y >= y1 and crit_y <= y2 and
		    !deleted[crit_x][crit_y]) {
			deleted[crit_x][crit_y] = true;
			to_add.push({crit_x, crit_y});
			return true;
		}
		return false;
	};

	while (q--) {
		int x1, y1, x2, y2;
		cin >> x1 >> y1 >> x2 >> y2;
		if (x1 > x2) swap(x1, x2);
		if (y1 > y2) swap(y1, y2);
		x1--, y1--;

		// Calculating E and V
		int v = (x2 - x1 + 1) * (y2 - y1 + 1);
		int e = calc_region(pvert, x1, x2, y1, y2 - 1) +
		        calc_region(phorz, x1, x2 - 1, y1, y2);
		e += 2 * (x2 - x1) + 2 * (y2 - y1);

		// Calculating C

		int c = calc_region(pcrit, x1 - 1, x2, y1 - 1, y2);

		for (int i = x1; i <= x2; i++) {
			c -= check_vertice(i, y1, x1, x2, y1, y2);
			c -= check_vertice(i, y2, x1, x2, y1, y2);
		}

		for (int j = y1; j <= y2; j++) {
			c -= check_vertice(x1, j, x1, x2, y1, y2);
			c -= check_vertice(x2, j, x1, x2, y1, y2);
		}

		while (!to_add.empty()) {
			auto point = to_add.front();
			to_add.pop();
			deleted[point[0]][point[1]] = false;
		}

> 		// Use Eulur's formula to calculate query answer

Reviewer 4: ```suggestion
		// Use Euler's formula to calculate query answer
```
